.TH HXED 1 "March 2026" "hxed" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
hxed \- modern hex viewer for binary data analysis

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hxed
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILENAME\fR]
.br
.B hxed
.B \-h 
| 
.B \-v

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hxed
is a modern hex viewer designed for inspecting binary data from files or standard input.
It features high-performance rendering, colorized heatmaps, and entropy analysis
to help identify patterns and data structures in binary blobs.

If both a filename and data from standard input are provided,
the filename takes precedence.

.SH OPTIONS

.SS Input
.TP
.BR \-f , " \-\-file " \fI<filename>\fR
Read input from \fIfilename\fR. Optional if data is provided via standard input.

.SS Display
.TP
.BR \-m , " \-\-mode " \fI<num|'name'>\fR
Select output mode:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
0 or \fBhex\fR (Hexadecimal)
.IP \(bu 2
1 or \fBbin\fR (Binary)
.IP \(bu 2
2 or \fBoct\fR (Octal)
.IP \(bu 2
3 or \fBdec\fR (Decimal)
.RE
Default is \fBhex\fR.

.TP
.BR \-hm , " \-\-heatmap " \fI<adaptive|fixed|none>\fR
Enable heatmap coloring based on byte values using 16 colors. 
.I adaptive
scales colors to the file's byte range, while \fIfixed\fR uses the full 0-255 range.
Disabled automatically if color output is disabled.

.TP
.BR \-w , " \-\-width " \fI<num>\fR
Number of bytes per line (default: 16).
A value of \fB0\fR disables line breaks (only valid with \fB\-\-raw\fR).

.TP
.BR \-g , " \-\-grouping " \fI<num>\fR
Group bytes visually (default: 1). A value of \fB0\fR removes all spacing.

.TP
.BR \-a , " \-\-ascii"
Toggle the ASCII representation column.

.TP
.BR \-c , " \-\-color"
Toggle colored output. Disabling color also disables heatmap and string highlighting.

.TP
.BR \-s , " \-\-string"
Highlight printable ASCII strings within the hex view.

.TP
.BR \-e , " \-\-entropy"
Display Shannon entropy per line to identify compressed or encrypted data.

.TP
.BR \-th , " \-\-toggle\-header"
Toggle the display of the header, footer, and magic byte detection.

.TP
.BR \-sz , " \-\-skip\-zero"
Skip lines containing only zero bytes (\fB00\fR).

.TP
.BR \-re , " \-\-reverse"
Enable reverse mode: interpret numeric input as bytes and output raw ASCII.
The input format is defined by \fB\-m\fR.

.SS Reverse Mode Details
Input tokens can be separated by whitespace, commas (\fB,\fR), semicolons (\fB;\fR), colons (\fB:\fR), or pipes (\fB|\fR).
In \fBhex\fR and \fBbin\fR modes, separators are ignored for a continuous stream.
In \fBoct\fR and \fBdec\fR modes, explicit separation is required unless octal 
input uses fixed 3-digit groups.

.TP
.BR \-ra
When used with \fB\-\-raw\fR, produces raw ASCII output from numeric input.

.SS Read Range
.TP
.BR \-o , " \-\-offset " \fI<num>\fR
Start reading at byte offset. Magic byte detection is disabled when an offset is used.

.TP
.BR \-\-limit \fI<num>\fR
Stop reading at the specified absolute byte position.

.TP
.BR \-r , " \-\-read\-size " \fI<num>\fR
Read at most \fInum\fR bytes. 
.B \-\-limit
and 
.B \-\-read\-size
are mutually exclusive.

.SS Size Suffixes
Numeric values for offset, limit, and read-size support decimal suffixes:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B k
= 1,000 bytes
.IP \(bu 2
.B M
= 1,000,000 bytes
.IP \(bu 2
.B G
= 1,000,000,000 bytes
.RE

.SS Search
.TP
.BR \-se , " \-\-search " \fI<pattern>\fR
Search for patterns and print matching lines. Supported prefixes:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fBa:<text>\fR (ASCII)
.IP \(bu 2
\fBd:<n,n>\fR (Decimal bytes)
.IP \(bu 2
\fBb:<bits>\fR (Binary)
.IP \(bu 2
\fBx:<hex>\fR (Hex string)
.RE

.SS Output
.TP
.BR \-p , " \-\-pager"
Pipe output through the system pager (e.g., \fI$PAGER\fR or \fIless\fR).

.TP
.BR \-ro , " \-\-raw"
Enable raw output mode. This removes addresses, headers, footers, and colors.

.SH INFORMATION
.TP
.BR \-\-show\-config
Show current configuration file path and active values, then exit.

.TP
.BR \-h , " \-\-help"
Display help and exit.

.TP
.BR \-v , " \-\-version"
Display version information and exit.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/hxed/hxed.conf
Standard location for the user-specific configuration file.
.TP
.I /etc/hxed.conf
Global configuration file (location may vary depending on the 
.B CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX
used during compilation).
.PP
Since the configuration path depends on the installation method and 
operating system, use:
.RS
.B hxed --show-config
.RE
to display the exact path currently used by the executable.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PAGER
The pager used when \fB\-p\fR is specified. Falls back to \fIless\fR if unset. (more on windows)
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
If set, disables color output by default.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B hxed image.png
Standard view of a file.
.TP
.B hxed \-ro \-w 0 file > out.txt
Dump file as a single line of hex values to a text file.
.TP
.B printf '48656c6c' | hxed \-re \-m 0
Convert hex string back to "Hell".

.SH EXIT STATUS
.IP 0 2
Success.
.IP 1 2
General error.

.SH AUTHOR
Joshua Jallow (pm: @github/jjice)

.SH COPYRIGHT
MIT License.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xxd (1),
.BR hexdump (1),
.BR od (1)